what do we go today what are we looking
at yep so we're looking at m80 today
which is a globular cluster so it's
gotta be a cluster in the constellation
of Scorpius it's released one because
it's so dense it's about a hundred
thousand stars in m8 see it's one of the
densest known globular clusters in the
Milky Way so it's really exciting
cluster because it's so dense the other
reason that I love it is that it's in an
area of sky next to something that's
absolutely beautiful this is called the
Rho Ophiuchi nebula which I probably
pronounced terribly and butchered that
but this nebula is gorgeous it's one of
the nearest star forming regions to the
Milky Way where's our customer it's a
tiny little blue fuzz dot right in the
top left-hand corner so this thing's
about 400 light years away and they
globular clusters about 300,000 light
years away there's nowhere actually near
in space but it's near on the sky I just
want to show this because it was pretty
picture it's lovely it's beautiful being
so dense it means there's a lot going on
you know there's a lot of stars or
jostling for space right in the center
of the cluster so that means that you've
got a lot of collisions of stars a lot
of like close passes of stars that tends
to make a lot of blue stragglers which I
think Mike already discussed way back
when and when he talked about m3 but the
other thing because it's so dense
there's just so much energy available so
it means that you can look in really
high-energy wavelengths so I found this
paper from 2003 hindquarter and they use
the Chandra x-ray telescope to look at
ma T so they're literally x-raying this
globular cluster this is the image that
they got of ma T it's kind of boring
isn't it but it is a picture of this
globular cluster in x-rays so can you
see these two rings that they have put
around their image so this is sort of
that outer circle that's it like 39 arc
seconds in 60th of a degree is an arc
minute the sixtieth about is an arc
second and this inner ones at six arc
seconds whereas the whole cluster itself
is nine arc minutes across so this x-ray
image is right in the very center in
that densest region that really is sort
of overexposed right you've just got
sort of like flat light from the optical
image and so what they're finding in the
x-ray image they found 19 possible x-ray
sources in the very middle of this
cluster
and why should I be excited by x-ray
source I would imagine spaces full of
x-ray source no necessarily so x-ray
sources are the most high-energy things
in mostly in the universe you got a
gamma-ray burst there's obviously higher
higher energy than x-ray but x-ray means
black holes neutron stars pulsars all of
the cool stuff what they did was they
went away to try and figure out what
these 19 possible sources were and they
did that by saying if I take an x-ray
image in a very like narrow wave
battement in x-rays I'm going to do that
in a load of narrow bands next to each
other I'm gonna get sort of like a
spectrum of how bright it is in those
various different bands and then we know
sort of what various different objects
look like in those rays different bands
in what shape they should have when you
plot it another thing that I think is
really exciting is an x-ray binary and
they found two in this cluster from
those 19 sources they found two what
they think of x-ray binaries so they
found this one which was they've labeled
CX 2 and this one see X 6 and so the
shape of this sort of density
distribution that they've found this
energy distribution matches what you'd
expect for an x-ray binary binary is two
objects and they happen to be giving out
x-rays why so one of these objects is a
normal star the other one is a black
hole or a neutron star so we're talking
black holes of sort of stellar mass like
ten times the mass of the Sun we're not
talking supermassive things that are
found in galaxies were looking like you
know the piddly things piddly relative
to so you got a black hole or a neutron
star and then some other generic star
over here and what's happening is that
this neutron star or black hole is
getting quite greedy and it's accreting
material from the normal star and so as
that material falls away from that star
it loses gravitational energy it gains
in kinetic energy as it spins faster and
faster around the object that it's been
created by and as it gains kinetic
energy it gets really hot it gets so hot
that it gives off like thermal x-rays
now there's two types of x-ray binaries
or others to classes hi my secretary
binaries and low mass x-ray binaries
they're very invented with their names
hi my sector e binaries is when you do
just have a generic like
main-sequence star so you know these
stars that's just happily burning
hydrogen into helium it's probably
bigger than the Sun hello my secretary
binary is where you have something
that's much lower mass so you have
something that's lower mass than the Sun
so it's like an M or a K star or maybe
even like a white dwarf and so you can
imagine in a very very dense environment
you form a lot of binary companions and
so that's how the high mass x-ray
binaries for the low mass x-ray binaries
though they think that they're formed
through a capture so you have a neutron
star or a black hole that's formed from
a normal star it's probably gone
supernova and it's collapsed and then
some other poor star quite low mass as a
sort of swung by it and been captured by
it you know the gravitational field is
messed up row that star was going
originally in it and it's now trapped in
this orbit and having its material
sucked off by the neutron star on the
black hole so these things are really
rare because you only get that kind of
capture happening in a super high dense
environment like ma T which you know
it's one of the densest got bigger
clusters there's only about 200 known in
the Milky Way that have been found and
two of them are in ma T these two that
we've talked about yeah that C X 2 and C
X 6 of both low mass x-ray binaries so
it's pretty cool that they're that rare
and yet you've got two of them in this
Messier object how does life end for a
low-mass x-ray binary does does the star
eventually just get eaten away to
nothing or does the star itself end up
throw into the black hole now well
you've asked the million dollar question
really no really not so this is what
people have been thinking about a lot
lately is whether these x-ray binaries
are gonna be a really important object
in future studies because if you think
about the fact that you have a black
hole and some other object or a neutron
star and some other objects especially
the high mass ones where you have these
massive stars that could collapse
themselves into neutron stars or into
black holes you then could have two
black holes orbiting each other and you
can imagine the scenario where the
gravitational field from having two
black holes going around each other
would get messed up and they don't
in words until they might merge and that
might sound familiar because this is
what LIGO has been hunting for when it's
been trying to detect gravitational
waves so all these news reports you've
been having in the past couple of months
well it's said we've detected
gravitational waves from something in
space and the model suggests that it's
two black holes merging people are
excited because they're thinking well
could this be because you've had an
x-ray binary that has sort of decayed
and then they've merged do you ended up
with gravitational waves being stacked
up I like it so I have a hundred little
move chart that I quite like which
unfortunately is now out of date they
announced another detection of
gravitational waves of two black holes
so there should be another two black
holes merging on here what you have on
here is the mass of the black holes and
stellar mass so this is sort of 30 times
the mass on 20 times the mass the Sun
and you have all the LIGO detection Zoe
here and this - one is sort of we think
this might be a detection but we're not
sure yet over here you've got something
that's a 20 solar mass black hole
merging with a 30 solar mass black hole
and like it were detected the
gravitational waves from it but down
here you've got the masses of the black
holes from x-ray binary Studies where
you've got two black holes together in
the night ray binary and you can see
that they're much lower masses then what
LIGO has been detecting so the big
question now is are these two separate
populations entirely these things that
we're detecting would lie go a part of
like formed from a completely different
formation mechanism them what's forming
the stuff in the x-ray binaries or is it
that just we're not detecting them which
would be weird because you'd think if
you'd have more massive black holes
around each other then they'd give off
much more energy and so they'd be
brighter in the x-rays so you'd be more
like set them so that's going to be the
big question in the future is and you
know what what are these two black holes
formed from they've formed in a globular
cluster when you have binary systems or
they just formed as black holes and
nobody knows yet
the same no matter which angle that you
look at it from but these ones look
quite different
this one is roughly the hot dog yeah we
call it a prolate galaxy it's meant to
be kind of rugby ball shaped